Ward Cunningham and co-author Bo Leuf, in their book The 
Wiki Way: Quick Collaboration on the Web, described the essence of the Wiki concept as follows:[8]


A wiki invites all users—not just expe
rts—to edit any page or to create new pages within the wi
ki Web site, using only a standard "plain-vanilla" Web browser without any extra add-ons.
Wi
ki promotes meaningful topic associati
ons between different pages by making page link creation
 intuitively easy and showing whether an intended target page exists or not.
A 
wiki is not a carefully crafted site 
created by experts and professional writer
s, and designed for casual visitors. Instead, it se
eks to involve the typical visitor/user in an ongoing 
process of creation and collaboration that constantly changes the website landscape.
A wiki
 enables communities of editors and c
 ontributors to write documents collab
 oratively. All that people require to contribute 
 is a computer, Internet access, a web browser, and a basi
 c understanding of a simple markup language (e.g., HTML). A si
 ngle page in a wiki website is referred to as a "wiki page", while 
 the entire collection of pages, which are usually 
 well-interconnected by 
 hyperlinks, is "the wiki". A wiki is essentially a database for creating, bro
 omplex, and networked text, while also allowing for ed
 itor argument, debate, and interaction
  regarding the content and formatting.[9] A defining char
  acteristic of wiki technolog
  y is the ease with which pages can be created and update
  d. Generally, there is no review by
   a moderator or gatekeeper before modifications are accep
   ted and thus lead to changes on the website. Many wi
   kis are open to alteration by the general public w
   ithout requiring registration of user accounts. Many edit
   s can be made in real-time and appear almost instantly onli
   
   ne, but this feature facilitates abuse of the system. Private w
   iki servers require user authentication to edit pages, an
   d sometimes even to read them. Mag
   ed N. Kamel Boulos, Cit
   o Maramba, and Steve Wheeler write that the open wikis pro
   duce a process of Social Darwinism. "'Unfit' sentences and
   ey are not considered 'fit', which hopefully results in the
    evolution of a higher quality and more relevant page. While

     such openness may invite 'vandalism' and the posting of un
     true information, this same openness also makes it possibl
     e to rapidly correct or restore a 'quality' wiki page."[10]


Editing
For 
the project page on editing Wikitext on Wikipedia, see Help:Wikitext.
W
ikitext
Cheatsheet
All Wikitext
Magic links
Visual files
Sound files
Tables
Using templates
Using HTML codes within Wikitext
vte
Some wikis have an Edit button o
r link directly on the pag
e being
 viewed, if the user has permission t
 o edit the page. This can lead 
 to a te
 xt-based editing page where part
 icipants 
 can structure and format wiki page
 s with a sim
 plified markup language, sometimes 
 known as Wikitext, 
 Wiki markup or Wikicode (it can also l
 ead to a WYSIWYG e
 diting page; see the paragraph after the
  table below). For
  example, starting lines of text with asterisk
  s could create
  te a bulleted list. The style and syntax 
  of wikitexts can vary great
  l
  y among wiki implementatio
  ns,[example needed] some of which al
  so allow HTML tags.

Wikis have favoured pla
in-text edi
ting, with fewer and simpler conventi
ons than HTML, for indica
ting style and 
structure. Although limiti
ng access to 
HTML and Cascading Style Sheet
s (CSS) of wikis limits
 use
r ability to alter the structur
e and formatting of wik
i content, there are some benefits.
 Limited access to CSS promotes consistency in t
he look and feel, and having J
avaScript d

isabled prevents a user
 from implementing code that may limit other users' access.